Welcome to the Health AI brief, breaking
down the AI shaping our world one
concept at a time.
We have AI systems that can analyze an
ECG in seconds and others that can
listen to a consultation and draft a
clinic note. They're powerful
specialized tools, but in the wider
world, we hear very different
conversation about AI. Discussions about
machines becoming conscious or a future
super intelligence that could change
humanity forever. It can be difficult to
reconcile these two realities, the
pragmatic tools we're beginning to use
in our hospitals and the science fiction
scenarios that dominate the headlines.
How do we make sense of this? The key is
to understand the fundamental difference
between the AI we have today and the AI
that may exist tomorrow. It's the
difference between narrow and general
intelligence. The AI we use today
without exception is in a category known
as narrow AI. You can think of this as
kind of a worldclass super specialist.
It might be the best in the world at
spotting diabetic retinopathy, say, but
it knows absolutely nothing else. It
can't read a chest X-ray. It can't order
a blood test, and it can't tell if the
patient's symptoms started yesterday or
two years ago. It has a deep expertise
in one single narrow domain without
capability outside of it. AI
development's always looking to expand
the scope of what these narrow AIs can
do, but they've still not reached the
next hypothetical step, which is often
termed artificial general intelligence
or AGI. This is the goal that many
frontier AI companies and researchers
are working towards currently. AGI would
have human level cognitive abilities
across a wide range of tasks. You know,
it could say learn to reason, problem
solve in a flexible way much like we do.
An AGI could in theory read a patient's
notes, look at their scans, synthesize a
differential diagnosis, and then switch
tasks to analyze the stock market or
compose music. There's significant
debate in the field about exactly when
and how we might get there. Beyond
artificial general intelligence lies a
further even more speculative stage
called known as artificial super
intelligence or ASI. This is an
intellect that would vastly exceed the
brightest human minds in practically
every field from scientific creativity
to social wisdom. This is the AI of most
science fiction, an intelligence that
could solve problems and develop new
technologies at a speed that we can't
even comprehend. And this of course
remains firmly within the realm of of
theory. So why does this spectrum from
narrow AI of today to the theoretical
super intelligence of tomorrow matter to
us as clinicians? I think first it
allows us to ground our expectations. So
when a company presents a new AI tool
for for your hospital or healthcare
service, you know that you're dealing
with narrow AI. The job is to rigorously
assess its performance within this one
specific task, its so-called intended
purpose. You need to think carefully
about what specific purpose was it
designed for? What specific um uh types
of data? Um you need to ask what's its
precise function? What are the specific
areas it can safely operate operate in?
What are its failure modes? And what
happens when it encounters something
just south just outside of its narrow
training. Second, this framework helps
us separate the hype from reality. The
the long-term ethical debates about AGI
and ASI are incredibly important for
society, but they're not directly
relevant to the clinical validation of a
new ECG algorithm you might use
tomorrow, which is much more of a narrow
AI. And we mustn't let the speculative
long-term conversations distract from
the immediate practical task of
appraising the narrow tools in front of
us with clinical rigor. And finally, it
gives us a lens through which to view
the future. While true ASI isn't on the
immediate horizon, the push towards it
is making narrow AI more capable and
flexible. As we see this with kind of
the growing range of things that large
language models can do. We're starting
to see these so-called foundation models
that can be fine-tuned to several
different related medical tasks. It's a
trend to watch, but it's still a world
away from the adaptable general
intelligence of a human clinician. So,
that's the spectrum of AI in a nutshell.
We live and work entirely in the world
of narrow AI currently and knowing its
limits is the key to being able to use
it safely and effectively. If you found
the this useful, please hit subscribe or
follow on your podcast app so you don't
miss future episodes.